packages/lazuli/README.md, before:

# Lazuli (Core)

Ruby for routing/thinking + Deno(Hono JSX) for rendering.

## Process model

- `lazuli dev`: starts **Rack + Deno** via `Lazuli::ServerRunner` (use `--reload` for development)
- `lazuli server`: starts **Rack only** (expects a separately-managed Deno renderer)
- `bundle exec rackup`: starts **Rack only** (the Deno renderer must be started separately)

### Starting the Deno renderer (rack-only mode)

```sh
deno run -A --unstable-net \
  --config "$(pwd)/deno.json" \
  "$(bundle show lazuli)/assets/adapter/server.tsx" \
  --app-root "$(pwd)" \
  --socket "$(pwd)/tmp/sockets/lazuli-renderer.sock"
```

## DB (SQLite)

```sh
# runs db/migrate/*.up.sql and creates db/development.sqlite3
lazuli db create

# rollback last migration
lazuli db rollback
```

Override the DB file path with `LAZULI_DB_PATH` (or `LAZULI_DB`).

Repository helpers:

```rb
class UserRepository < Lazuli::Repository
  def self.all
    db = open # uses default path (or LAZULI_DB_PATH)
    db.execute("SELECT * FROM users")
  ensure
    db&.close
  end
end
```

## Turbo

Lazuli loads Turbo (`@hotwired/turbo`) so **Turbo Drive** works out of the box.

### Turbo Frames

Frames are intentionally **framework-light**: users can write `<turbo-frame id="...">` in their TSX and return normal HTML.

### Turbo Streams (HTML is rendered in Deno)

Ruby builds stream operations; Deno renders the `<template>` HTML via JSX fragments.

```rb
class UsersResource < Lazuli::Resource
  def create
    user = UserRepository.create(name: params[:name])

    stream_or(redirect_to("/users")) do |t|
      t.append :users_list, "components/UserRow", user: user
      t.update :flash, "components/FlashMessage", message: "Added"
    end
  end
end
```

Fragments live under your app root, e.g. `app/components/UserRow.tsx` and are referenced as `components/UserRow`.

`targets:` is supported for selector-based updates/removals.

Shorthand: if the first argument starts with a CSS selector prefix (`#`, `.`, `[`), Lazuli treats it as `targets:`.

```rb
stream do |t|
  t.remove "#users_list li"         # => targets: "#users_list li"
  t.update "#flash", "components/Flash", message: "hi"
end
```

## Islands (hydration)

Use `<Island />` to hydrate just a small interactive region; Lazuli will auto-inject the hydration runtime when it sees `data-lazuli-island` in the HTML.

Interactive components can start with `"use hydration";` as a simple convention (it’s a no-op directive).

```tsx
// app/components/Counter.tsx
"use hydration";
import { useState } from "hono/jsx";
export default function Counter(props: { initialCount: number }) {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(props.initialCount);
  return <button onClick={() => setCount(count + 1)}>Count: {count}</button>;
}
```

```tsx
// app/pages/home.tsx
import Island from "lazuli/island";
import Counter from "../components/Counter.tsx";

export default function Home() {
  return <Island path="components/Counter" component={Counter} data={{ initialCount: 1 }} />;
}
```

## RPC (experimental)

Define an allowlisted JSON RPC method on a Resource:

```rb
class UsersResource < Lazuli::Resource
  rpc :rpc_index, returns: [User]

  def rpc_index
    UserRepository.all
  end
end
```

Run `lazuli types` to generate:
- `client.d.ts` (includes `RpcRequests`/`RpcResponses`)
- `client.rpc.ts` and `app/client.rpc.ts` (typed `fetch` helper)

In an Island/hydrated component:

```ts
import { rpc } from "/assets/client.rpc.ts";
const users = await rpc("UsersResource#rpc_index", undefined);
```

Commit message:

Auto-islandize pages via use hydration

packages/lazuli/README.md, after:

# Lazuli (Core)

Ruby for routing/thinking + Deno(Hono JSX) for rendering.

## Process model

- `lazuli dev`: starts **Rack + Deno** via `Lazuli::ServerRunner` (use `--reload` for development)
- `lazuli server`: starts **Rack only** (expects a separately-managed Deno renderer)
- `bundle exec rackup`: starts **Rack only** (the Deno renderer must be started separately)

### Starting the Deno renderer (rack-only mode)

```sh
deno run -A --unstable-net \
  --config "$(pwd)/deno.json" \
  "$(bundle show lazuli)/assets/adapter/server.tsx" \
  --app-root "$(pwd)" \
  --socket "$(pwd)/tmp/sockets/lazuli-renderer.sock"
```

## DB (SQLite)

```sh
# runs db/migrate/*.up.sql and creates db/development.sqlite3
lazuli db create

# rollback last migration
lazuli db rollback
```

Override the DB file path with `LAZULI_DB_PATH` (or `LAZULI_DB`).

Repository helpers:

```rb
class UserRepository < Lazuli::Repository
  def self.all
    db = open # uses default path (or LAZULI_DB_PATH)
    db.execute("SELECT * FROM users")
  ensure
    db&.close
  end
end
```

## Turbo

Lazuli loads Turbo (`@hotwired/turbo`) so **Turbo Drive** works out of the box.

### Turbo Frames

Frames are intentionally **framework-light**: users can write `<turbo-frame id="...">` in their TSX and return normal HTML.

### Turbo Streams (HTML is rendered in Deno)

Ruby builds stream operations; Deno renders the `<template>` HTML via JSX fragments.

```rb
class UsersResource < Lazuli::Resource
  def create
    user = UserRepository.create(name: params[:name])

    stream_or(redirect_to("/users")) do |t|
      t.append :users_list, "components/UserRow", user: user
      t.update :flash, "components/FlashMessage", message: "Added"
    end
  end
end
```

Fragments live under your app root, e.g. `app/components/UserRow.tsx` and are referenced as `components/UserRow`.

`targets:` is supported for selector-based updates/removals.

Shorthand: if the first argument starts with a CSS selector prefix (`#`, `.`, `[`), Lazuli treats it as `targets:`.

```rb
stream do |t|
  t.remove "#users_list li"         # => targets: "#users_list li"
  t.update "#flash", "components/Flash", message: "hi"
end
```

## Islands (hydration)

Use `<Island />` to hydrate just a small interactive region; Lazuli will auto-inject the hydration runtime when it sees `data-lazuli-island` in the HTML.

If a **page module** starts with `"use hydration";`, Lazuli will auto-wrap the page as an Island (hydrate the whole page).

For non-page components, `"use hydration";` is just a convention (no behavior yet).

```tsx
// app/components/Counter.tsx
"use hydration";
import { useState } from "hono/jsx";
export default function Counter(props: { initialCount: number }) {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(props.initialCount);
  return <button onClick={() => setCount(count + 1)}>Count: {count}</button>;
}
```

```tsx
// app/pages/home.tsx
import Island from "lazuli/island";
import Counter from "../components/Counter.tsx";

export default function Home() {
  return <Island path="components/Counter" component={Counter} data={{ initialCount: 1 }} />;
}
```

## RPC (experimental)

Define an allowlisted JSON RPC method on a Resource:

```rb
class UsersResource < Lazuli::Resource
  rpc :rpc_index, returns: [User]

  def rpc_index
    UserRepository.all
  end
end
```

Run `lazuli types` to generate:
- `client.d.ts` (includes `RpcRequests`/`RpcResponses`)
- `client.rpc.ts` and `app/client.rpc.ts` (typed `fetch` helper)

In an Island/hydrated component:

```ts
import { rpc } from "/assets/client.rpc.ts";
const users = await rpc("UsersResource#rpc_index", undefined);
```
